It's not the fastest. It hasn't got the
biggest payload, and it's now 49 years
since the prototypes first flew. But in
a world of hypersonics and AI, the
Tomahawk cruise missile is still a
weapon that keeps leaders of countries
that might be on the receiving end of
these awake at night. So why are they so
feared considering all the technological
advances in detection, electronic
warfare, and anti-missile systems? How
does it fare after nearly 50 years of
almost continuous development and over
2,350
have been used in active combat
situations? The Tomahawk started out in
1971 as a US Navy project to see if it
would be possible to launch a strategic
cruise missile from a submarine either
from the existing but large missile
tubes or the smaller torpedo tubes. Now,
cruise missiles have been used with
submarines before. The problem was that
they had to be launched from the decks
of the submarine, which meant that it
had to surface and then set up a cruise
missile for launch. All of which would
take time and during this process leave
it vulnerable to attack.
Launching the missile from underwater
was seen as the best possible option.
But it also needed a very long range
which ruled out a rocket engine to fit
into the small size, the size of a
torpedo. And a high efficiency turbo fan
would be used instead. But you can't
launch a turbo fanpowered missile from
underwater. So it would require a
miniature solid rocket motor that would
ignite once it had exited the torpedo
tube. This would push it through the
water to the surface and to about 100 m
into the air before the air inlet for
the turboan engine opened, the wings and
tail fins popped out and the rocket
motor fell off, allowing it to carry on
for the rest of the flight. Two
companies were given the contract to
build and test prototypes for the proof
of concept. These were General Dynamics
and LTV. During these trials between
1974 and 1976, the LTV ZBGM 110A failed
on two occasions, but the General
Dynamics ZGBM 109A worked flawlessly and
General Dynamics won the contract.
Although it was built by General
Dynamics, much of the navigation
technology was developed by the APL or
the Applied Physics Laboratory of John's
Hopkins University who had worked on
advanced navigation systems since the
1950s. As befits the US tradition of
giving Native American derived names to
weapons, it was assigned the name of
Tomahawk, a well-known word for a
compact, hard-hitting weapon, which fits
the missile rather well. Its official
name is the BGM109
Tomahawk land attack missile or TALM. By
1980, a ship launched version was also
being built and by 1984 a nuclear ground
launched version called the BGM 109G
Griffin was being co-developed too. This
carried a single W84 10 to 50 kiloton
nuclear warhead. The US deployed 322
Griffin missiles aboard 95 teal
vehicles. However, after the
intermediate range nuclear forces treaty
between the United States and the Soviet
Union came into force, that was to cover
missile launchers with ranges of 1,00 to
5,500 km or 620 to 3,420 mi. The entire
stock of griffins were destroyed by 1991
in accordance with the treaty. Now, in a
previous life, 25 odd years ago, I
created several successful online
businesses, all of which I handcoded
from scratch using PHP, MySQL, and
JavaScript, which I also learned as I
went along. And the one thing I wish I
had at the time was some way of speeding
up the learning process and doing it the
right way with less trial and error.
It's been 14 years since I did any
serious programming. But today, back-end
programming is often done with Python,
SQL, and Go. And our sponsors, Boot.dev,
have created a system for you to learn
these and more from the ground up in a
fun and intuitive way. Learning to
program can open up a world of
high-paying jobs as a software developer
or working for yourself to build up your
own products and services. And that's
the route which I took. And believe me,
it can be a life-changing opportunity.
Boot.dev takes you through the basics as
you work your way through the examples
to build real projects, gaining
experience, points, and achievements.
This isn't some learn it in a week
course. To become proficient takes time.
Going deep into a theory and practice.
And to do the whole curriculum takes
around about 12 months. But you can do
it in your own time and at your own
pace. Don't worry about getting stuck.
Boots, the AI bear wizard, has been
trained on every lesson and knows what
you should be doing and sees where you
go wrong and will guide you, but he
won't give you the answers. You don't
learn by just being handed it on a
plate. It's free to create an account so
you can read and watch in guest mode,
but the paid membership opens up
hands-on coding, AI assistance, progress
tracking, and access to the boot.dev Dev
Discord community for real human
assistance. Get started today by going
to boot.dev and using my code curious
droid to get 25% off your entire first
year on the annual plan. And it's also
risk-free with a 30-day no quibble
refund policy.
The key for any cruise missile is
navigation. It has to be able to be
launched anywhere in the world and find
its target autonomously. Of course, back
before the mid 1980s, GPS didn't exist.
The way the missile would find its way
was through a combination of an inertial
navigation system, INS, a terrain
contour matching system, Turk, and for
the final hitting of a target part, a
digital scene matching area correlator
or DSMAC.
The accuracy of the inertial navigation
system alone was good enough to get it
near the target. and for midcourse
corrections. But for the longer the
journey went on, the greater the error
that occurred. That's just the way they
worked as mechanical devices relying
upon spinning gyroscopes. They were
good, but not good enough to pinpoint a
target up to 2,500 km or 1500 m away.
With an error of 0.01
per hour, a flight of a,000 km could be
out by up to 150 m. So, a 2 1/2,000 km
flight or 1,500 mi, the error could be
up to at least 375 m, enough to miss the
target completely. Though, that might
not be too much of a problem if it had a
nuclear warhead. But all the Tomahawks
that have ever been used had
conventional warheads of 450 kg and thus
required a much greater accuracy. So,
they backed it up with a terrain contour
matching system or Turkon. This would
use digitized terrain maps which the
onboard computer would follow and then
compare to the data from its onboard
radar altimeter and make corrections
along the way to compensate for those
introduced by the inertial navigation
system. Because it's following the
terrain, it can stay very close to the
ground to evade radar, and its slim
fuselage has a very low radar
cross-section, which at very low
altitudes makes it very difficult to
detect even today.
But why not just use Turk? Well, the
problem was that flying across large
bodies of water like lakes or the sea,
there would be no useful terrain data,
so it could get lost. So, the ins would
still be needed to point it in the right
direction. and Turkom would check the
fine course details to make sure that it
got to the target correctly. However,
what happens if you want to hit a
specific building in a city or an
industrial area or a bunker in the
countryside for example? This is where
the final digital scene matching or the
DSMAC comes in. This uses photographs of
the target and the area around it and a
camera in the missile. The camera then
scans the ground as it travels along,
looking for a match so that the missile
would know where it was during its
terminal phase. But this did have a
weakness though. In areas of flat open
terrain with little visual detail, like
desert areas, the accuracy could be
affected.
For the anti-ship version, the Tomahawk
used an active radar seeker rather than
the Turkom or DSMAC, which was derived
from the harpoon missile for sea
skimming pop-up terminal attacks.
These first generation tomahawks were
known as the block ones and entered
operations in the early 1980s. The
accuracy or the circular error probable
of a block one without the DSMAC was
around 80 m. But with the block twos
with the DSMAC fitted, this dropped down
to about 10 meters, making it the most
accurate longrange cruise missile in the
world at the time. However, this meant
that it relied upon upto-ate terrain
maps and images of the target. Should
any of that change, then the accuracy
could be compromised. This information
could take several days to repair. So,
if a high value target were mobile, it
could be too slow to respond. The first
time tomahawks were used in combat was
in the 1991 Operation Desert Storm.
These were block two versions, but
didn't yet have the GPS, but they proved
to be very effective, taking out
strategic target and air defense
systems. Only Tomahawks and the F-117s
with laserg guided bombs were stealthy
enough to attack the heavily defended
targets in Baghdad, which was considered
to have air defenses more formidable
than those of any Eastern European
target at the height of the Cold War.
Tomahawks made up 2/3 of all the weapons
used during the initial strike with 106
being launched in the first wave and 290
in total for the duration of the
conflict. and out of that 242
hit their target. This is one of the
reasons why in operation desert storm
they would follow routes chosen to avoid
known air defense systems, radars and in
preGGPS days open areas of desert. In
the initial attack, many flew to Iraq
from Iran over the Zacros mountains,
which gave the systems a much better
terrain relief to follow compared with
the very straight, very flat, over the
desert southern route from the Gulf. And
it was a more unexpected route for the
Iraqis to expect an attack to come from.
This sent out a message to potential
adversaries that this type of warfare by
the Tomahawk cruise missile could be
highly effective against even the best
defended areas. The next big change came
with a block 3 version in 1994. This
introduced jamresistant GPS and a new
more powerful control system to replace
the old tankbased green screen. The
DSMAC was also upgraded to the DSMAC 2
to take in a greater area around the
target to counter the issues they had
seen in the flat deserts of Iraq. One of
the benefits of the GPS upgrade was that
it allowed three types of attack to be
mounted. GPS only for rapid mission
planning down to just 1 hour but with
some reduced accuracy. DSMAC only, which
would take longer to plan, but the
terminal accuracy was somewhat better,
but it took up to 80 hours of planning
time. And the third was GPS aided
missions that combined with the DSMAC2
to give the greatest overall accuracy,
but longer planning than just GPS. GPS
not only helped back up the other
systems, it also added greater accuracy
with some reports saying that it was
less than 5 m, but officially it was
still quoted less than 10 m. The turboan
engine was also upgraded to be 20% more
efficient and 3% more powerful. GPS also
allowed it to arrive at a particular
time or to loiter over the target,
waiting for other assets to arrive. The
Block 3's first time in combat was the
Bosnian War of 1993 when 13 were used to
attack Bosnian Serb air defense systems.
The Block 4 tactical Tomahawk missiles
arrived in 2004 along with a raft of new
capabilities and was the last major
update. These were the first to be able
to be reprogrammed whilst in flight via
two-way satellite communications link to
strike any of 15 pre-programmed
alternate targets or redirect the
missile to any GPS target coordinates.
It could also send images back to the
command base to assess damage from
previous attacks, for example, so that
it will be able to direct attacks
against a new target if the existing one
had been destroyed. It also had an
updated anti-jamming version of GPS.
Anti-jamming GPS systems use specially
shaped antennas which form nulls in the
signal reception but preserve the
antenna's view of the GPS satellites
while greatly reducing the effects of
jamming signals. By 2020 and due to the
importance of the tomahawks had gained
over the years, the US Navy started
block five, which was a reertification
and modernization program to keep it in
service for the next 15 years. These
included upgraded navigation and
communications, a new seeker head for
the anti-ship version which was able to
hit moving ships, and a programmable
joint multiple effects warhead system,
JMU's warhead, which could be used
against soft targets or hardened bunkers
without the need to change the warhead.
Now, this is how the Tomahawk has
managed to keep relevant for the last 49
years. a constant program of updates to
a modular design without having to
rebuild the thing from scratch. There
might well be new weapons like the
hypersonic missiles and highly
specialized missiles out there, but the
extremely wide range of targeting
coverage that the Tomahawk brings will
keep it in use well into the 2040s. What
has really been making a difference in
how things might well move in the near
future is the Ukrainian success in
creating homegrown drones and now cruise
missiles like the Flamingo for a
fraction of the cost of traditional
westernmade ones and in very short
turnaround times. The big arms producers
are already looking at how they can
replicate the Ukrainian model to produce
things like the Tomahawk but at much
lower costs and in much greater numbers.
Although there are plans to replace the
Tomahawk with the next generation land
attack weapon, that isn't expected to be
operational until at least 2028 to 2030.
However, if this new ethos takes root
quickly in the West, there might well be
a lot of other new lowcost mass-produced
weapons coming down the line in the not
tooistant future. So, I hope you enjoyed
the video, and if you are, then please
thumbs up, share, and subscribe. And a
big thank you goes to all of our patrons
for the ongoing support.